CALIcon Session Proposal
Frank Bennett
February 24, 2020
1 Summary
Join this session to learn how a union of the open-access Indigo Book and the
open-source Jurism reference manager can extend the scope of the former,
improve the quality of the latter, and save everyone a great deal of time.

2 Description

This session concerns two resources. The Indigo Book is an open-access guide
to legal citation. Jurism is a variant of the open-source Zotero reference
manager, extended to handle legal materials. The session will cover the
background of each, explain why it is important, and proceed to outline
a plan for a next-generation approach to legal citation management. The
session aims to be comfortable for Luddites and inspiring to Wizards.
The two marquee projects of the session share a relation to The Bluebook:
A Uniform System of Citation, to which US courts and law reviews have
long looked for standard rules of legal citation. Indigo Book is a public-
domain statement of those rules, free for download. Jurism is an open-source
reference manager that applies the rules to generate standard citations. The
premise of both is that citation rules can and should be made more accessible
and easier to follow.
The Bluebook has been the target of considerable criticism over the years
for its complexity, and for zealous protection of its commercial interest in
a public standard. Nonetheless, prominent challengersmost notably the
ALWD Citation Manual and Chicago's own Maroonbookhave (like Indigo
Book) opted in the end to closely follow the Bluebook's rules. As Christine
Hurt observed in 2002,

1 this is the expected outcome of network eects:
simply stated, standardizing citation rules makes sense, the market abhors

1
Christine Hurt, Network Eects and Legal Citation: How Antitrust Theory Predicts
1
divergence, and all other things being equal, this oers an advantage to the
rst mover.

Yet authors bound by Bluebook rules complain of two things: the com-
plexity of the rules themselves; and the need to trawl through an ever-
expanding volume of text to master each iteration of the style.

2 The two
issues are separable. The complexity of the style reects that of the under-
lying material, and that is a product of the US federal system itself, beyond
editorial control. The burden of trawling through text in search of guidance,
however, is another matter, and connects directly to the main topic of this
session.
Technology has an answer to complex citation requirements. The basic
idea, implemented in the venerable PASCAL language circa 1985,
3 and on
a venerable PDP-11 in 1990,
4 is to store item details in a database of some
sort (a library), and to use those details to generate citations automatically.
This is reference management, and tools for this purpose have been in com-
mon use in most elds of research for decades. Using a reference manager,
an author writes their article, sets the style, and outputs their manuscript.
That's it. In a well-supported eld, the detailed arcana of citation guidelines
are of interest primarily to copy editors, obsessive citation geeks, and people
who maintain reference management software.
Despite the reference-intensive nature of our discipline,
5 lawyers have
not yet experienced this generational wave in research support tools, largely
because legal resources have a dierent kind of complexity. Research in
other elds draws heavily on a limited number of resource types (books,
articles, etc.), which have uniform metadata (title, volume, journal, etc.), but
are expressed in a bewildering variety of citation styles.
6 In contrast, legal
Who Will Build a Better Bluebook Mousetrap in the Age of Electronic Mice, 87 Iowa L.
Rev. 1257 (2002).
2
Compare Columbia Law Review Assn et al., The Bluebook: A Uniform System of
Citation (19th ed. 2010) (weighing in at 511 pages) with Columbia Law Review Assn
et al., The Bluebook: A Uniform System of Citation (20th ed. 2015) (extending to 560
pages).
3
See BibTeX, Wikipedia (2019), https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=
BibTeX&oldid=926358916.f; see also Leslie Lamport, L
ATEX: A Document Preparation
System (1986); Oren Patashnik, BibTeXing (Feb. 8, 1988), http://mirrors.ctan.org/
biblio/bibtex/base/btxdoc.pdf; Oren Patashnik, Designing BibTeX Styles (Feb. 8,
1988), http://mirrors.ctan.org/biblio/bibtex/contrib/doc/btxhak.pdf.
4
Oral History of Ernest Beutler, Legends in Hematology (American Society of Hematol-
ogy Nov. 6, 1990), https://www.hematology.org/About/History/Legends/1616.aspx.
5
See Fred R. Shapiro, Origins of Bibliometrics, Citation Indexing, and Citation Anal-
ysis: The Neglected Legal Literature, 43 J. Am. Soc. Info. Sci. 337 (1992).
6
A leading repository contains over 2,000 unique stylesheets. Ocial repository for
2
researchers are blessed with a single dominant style, but that style addresses
an uneven eld of resources, some subject to sporadic revision (statutes and
regulations), and many bound by idiosyncratic citation conventions (such as
vendor-neutral cases, bills, resolutions, codied versus uncodied legislation,
and vendor-bound legislative services).
7 These are very dierent challenges,
and tools developed for other communities are not immediately adaptable
to the needs of the law. As acknowledged by Dan Stillman, lead developer
of Zotero:
There's a huge amount of necessary complexity in the multilin-
gual and legal functionality, and developing it requires a high
level of specialized knowledge that we (and most developers we
would want to hire) simply don't have.
8
In fact, Jurism addresses the issues to which Dan refers here.
9 The point
that he makes is only that, as Zotero is a tool for general use, a merger of
Jurism functionality into Zotero is beyond the scope of his own project. In
other words, bringing reference management to the law is a task for the legal
community to spearheadand today we can get there in a few short steps.
As Indigo Book and Jurism exemplify, open resources can be built: the
more serious challenge is in their maintenance. This is where a union of the
two projects comes into its own.
Updating a citation system with the size and complexity of Indigo Book
or Bluebook poses a problem of scalability. The volume of interrelated detail
is considerable, and no editor can have close familiarity with developments in
every corner of the US national system at all levels. The Bluebook addresses
this by oering prizes for participation in an online survey in the lead-up to
a new edition.
10 This works, but it is rather cumbersome, largely opaque,
and operates only at ve-year intervals.
Citation Style Language (CSL) citation styles (Feb. 22, 2020), https://github.com/
citation-style-language/styles.
7
For a cram course on the some of the complexities involved, see Thomas Bruce, Making
Metasausage, (Cornell Legal Information Instittue, May 7, 2012Aug. 25, 2014), https:
//blog.law.cornell.edu/metasausage/.
8
Comment by Dan Stillman (dstillman), Zotero Forums, (July 19, 2018), https://
forums.zotero.org/discussion/comment/313006#Comment_313006
9
By extending Zotero's legal item types, adding a full set of identiers for US courts
and jurisdictions, and implementing per-jurisdiction citation stylesheets.
10
In 2013, survey takers were oered the exciting possibility of winning a Kindle
Paperwhite e-reader or a free paper copy of the 20th edition and a two-year sub-
scription to the Bluebook Online website. See Emily Lawson, The Bluebook needs
you!, UHLC Nota Bene (Oct. 16, 2013), https://notabeneuh.blogspot.com/2013/10/
the-bluebook-needs-you.html.
3
With complete automation of the examples it contains, Indigo Book can
take advantage of Jurism infrastructure to test revisions for consistency and
side eects. With that quality-assurance backstop, feedback can be processed
on a rolling basis, and updates can be released at more frequent intervals.
The result will be a citation system consistent with Bluebook rules, more
responsive to practical requirements, and with full reference manager support
thrown in for free.
A prototype version of a dynamic Indigo Book supporting this workow
will be demonstrated at the session, with open access to participants. The
session will conclude with a discussion of organizational requirements for the
initiative.
4
